---
title: "Worms Post 4: Terrain Generation"
excerpt: "A post discussing my way of implimenting worm like terrain generation"
tags: 
  - University
  - GEP
  - Worms
  - C++
---

# It begins!

This week I started my work for Terrain by working on its generation.

Firsly its worth noting that my Marching Cube method has been dropped because I dont really think it will work super well for the worms terrain and so instead I've decided to go with the render target method that was recommended in the lectures. 

## The Theory

The idea for this method is to use something called a render target which is basically a seperate space to draw into from the standard screen. Its like drawing into a texture, you just have to note when you want to draw into the RT or the screen space.

The render target stores data that you write into it and is normally on the GPU which allows you to draw the content of the render target into the screen space, however in order to draw things into it or to get information about it you need to map it onto the CPU (and then when you're done map it back onto the GPU).

The reason why this method is useful is because when you draw things into the terrain you have to use a [blendstate](https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXTK/wiki/CommonStates) which specifies how you want data to be applied to the render target. This allows us to do things such perform operations that check if a pixel has an alpha value of 0 and if not make it 0, which will be how I plan to implement deformation. 

So now that I've talked a little about the theory, lets look at how it works in c++:

## The Implementation

//todo



